Okay. Uh, welcome back everyone. This is
the experience section of Cisco
rethinking 2026.
Last time I started talking about social
network models in to be specific, the
social relations model. We're going to
resume that today and hopefully work
through [clears throat] the uh workflow
that I outlined last time, but I have an
advertisement first uh because the
people in here may be interested. ID is
running in early March a um symposium a
two-day symposium which is focused on
the structures and practices of
scientific research quite generally it's
not ID is an ecology and biodiversity
institute it's just like there like
really close you can start wandering and
hit it like it's very close by um and uh
this is a student organized thing for
the most part I know some of the
students over there who've organized
And um if you're interested, check out
the website. You might want to
participate. You can register. You you
have to register, but you can register
for whatever you want and attend. On the
second day, I am presenting a workshop.
Um you'll see me on the far right there
in green called a guro approach to
scientific workflow. I am uh you may be
wondering what's that about. So am I. I
I have written a title and an abstract
and uh but not not the workshop yet. But
I will do something hopefully [laughter]
valuable there. Uh and uh but you can
see the other themes. Um I wish I could
go to the other workshops. Okay, that's
enough about that advertisement. U this
is the data set we're going to work
with. Just to remind you, this is this
data set. The Coaster Leki is what it's
called. This is data from Nicaragua
collected by Jeremy Coer. the Coster and
Coster and Leki at his longunning site
and it's 300 diads and we're the do each
each member of the diet is a household
and we're interested in explaining
exchange uh of food between households.
Uh this was the workflow I had outlined
before. We're going to try to get all
the way through this today.
um we have to build the generative model
[clears throat] of the uh social
relationships that drive exchange. I'm
going to explain that uh again. Uh then
we have a couple of questions about
reciprocity in the diads which is a big
question in anthropology social network
analysis in anthropology is how much
balance there is in exchange. Yeah. How
much how egalitarian these communities
are or rather to the extent that
exchange is driven by need. uh and not
not balance, right? So, we're going to
try to answer both of those things here.
Um I'm going to build up uh the models
uh incrementally. There's kind of a
destination model which has wealth
effects and association measures between
households and a bunch of stuff. But I'm
not going to start with that model
because I don't think that's a wise way
to do scientific software engineering. I
want to start with the simplest model
and add one feature at a time. And I'll
give you um an example of that kind of
workflow. And at each stage I'm going to
test it on synthetic data as well. We're
going to so I'm going to start is by
generating synthetic Nicaraguans
[laughter] and uh uh and they're going
to exchange and we're going to analyze
the data uh show what the how the model
performs and then add one feature at a
time analyzing the real data going back
to the design and and back and forth
until the end. Um
uh there'll be things at the end that we
want to look at. Posterior predictions
as usual and that animating social
network is we'll come back to that in
near the uh in the second half here.
It's meant to emphasize that when you
have a posterior distribution of social
networks, it's very hard to visualize
that. Uh and this is just a challenge in
representation. It's not that networks
are unique that way. But once you get
away from simple lowdimensional kinds of
functions, it's hard to visualize them.
Animation might work, but you can't put
animation in in papers yet. One day, we
will move away from the printing press.
Yes, but we're still prisoners of it for
some reason. We have the world's uh we
have an amazing internet and we're just
putting PDFs on it. I don't know what
we're doing, but one day. Anyway, uh
this is just a problem for for all of us
to solve collectively. And then there's
a series of comparisons and causal
effect estimates. We've talked about
causal effect estimates before. Um and
we we've implicitly done a bunch of
comparisons, but I want to focus a
little bit more in this example on
comparisons between models that are
different model specifications because
often you learn more about the model
that way by doing the comparisons. Uh so
I think that's a useful thing to do and
think of that as part of your end
workflow as well. So what are we
comparing? These comparisons aren't
about choosing a model because it's the
logic of the estimative model that
chooses a model for us. The comparisons
are about understanding the models and
the estimates. Does that make sense? So
we'll come to the end. Anyway, that's my
agenda. Ap I apologize that this is like
some kind of like cruise director
outline like you've arrived on board.
Welcome aboard. This is a 7-day cruise
and you know da da da. But uh we'll get
into the shuffle board in a moment here.
Um okay,
this is the structural causal model.
We're going to make this generative uh
going forward, but it's I'd like to
introduce just the structure first. At
the center of this, we have um gifts of
food from household A to household B. Uh
this is symmetric, right? There's also
GBA in every diad, but I just like to
focus on this one outcome variable, but
we're going to analyze both directions
in the actual data. Um, and we'd like to
know to what extent what's we like to
know what's driving this. Uh, and there
are two sorts of of effects that our
estimates nominate. The first are social
ties, that is special relationships, and
we'll be interested in in the balance in
those relationships. Right? So in a diad
uh within um uh the social ties whatever
strength they are um are the are those
is the strength of those ties balanced
within diads right so think of it this
way if you say somebody's your friend
they also say that you are their friend
yeah but that doesn't always happen in
the real world yeah you know that or the
strength of it varies uh and here uh
we're not asking people who their
friends are but instead uh Jeremy has
data on food moving between households.
Yeah. And the balance is there. Um the
other kinds of effects are generalized
effects or other aspects of the
households. It may be that some
households are just very generous and
give to everybody. Right? So that's not
a special uh relationship. That's not a
tie in in a social network. That's just
that they're generous. And then we might
ask questions about why they're
generous, like wealth. All right, maybe
rich households give and poor households
receive. That's a popular hypothesis and
we're going to investigate that in this
data set at the same time that we're
investigating balance in in diads. Okay,
does this make some sense? Uh this is
already a very complicated kind of
problem. It's the most basic social
network problem. I apologize. Uh but
it's a directed network which is one of
the things that makes it tricky because
we've got in any diad that includes
households A and B we've got exchange in
both directions and you've got all of
these arrows in this DAG and it's it's
just there's just nothing to say except
I'm sorry the universe is like this. Uh
there are also undirected networks.
There are um behaviors which are not
directed like proximity.
Yeah. So I don't often see this in the
human sciences, but people who study
other primates like monkeys often
analyze proximity networks. Proximity is
not a directed tie, [snorts] right? The
two individuals are close to one another
at the same time or not. There's only
one outcome. Yeah, but that you can use
these models to analyze that, but then
it's not directed.
Maybe I should have an example of that
in the book for the next edition. Okay.
Um let me talk about the inferial risk
here. the the thing about this
structure, we're going to start by
trying to estimate the ties. And uh
we're going to have to include features
of households and generalized giving and
receiving eventually to do that because
if you if you use your do calculus,
remember the backd dooror criterion.
Yeah, maybe that's new to some of you.
It's the that's supposed to be the other
part of the course, but it's it's in the
book as well. But to remind you um uh if
there if you if you're interested in the
causal effect of a variable like TBA at
the top, what is the effect of of social
B's tie to A? B's relationship with A
the directed relationship. Um if there
are arrows entering that variable and
you can follow those arrows through a
path back to the outcome, then there's
systematic bias and estimation that you
need to adjust for. So we have back door
pass here through the household
variables, right? So you think we're
going to need to adjust for generalized
giving and receiving in households, but
we're not going to that's the model
we're going for and that's the social
relations model that has both the diad
level tie effects and the generalized
giving and receiving effects. We're
going to start by ignoring the
confounding problem because we are
responsible scientific software
engineers. Yes. And we incrementally
develop features and test them and
that's that's the goal. But I it's nice
to know where we're going. It's just uh
uh right. Otherwise, you start wandering
randomly through model space and that
never ends well. Yeah. For anybody. So,
we're going to start simple and just
focus on the ties. Uh let me do um some
synthetic data simulation and I'm going
to I'm going to really present this code
and I want to talk through the chunks.
I'm not going to read every line to you.
I know in this in this room you folks
are just fluent in R, right? You love it
to death. Yeah. this the people at home
realize there are some there are some
pain expressions amused and pained
expressions in the audience um but uh
but if you do have uh detailed questions
about the syntax here feel free to ask I
wrote this code so in principle I
understand it but I may have to think
for a moment to remember exactly what I
did okay the first thing we're going to
do um I'm just going to make 25
households the numbers arbitrary but
this is a test data set yeah um I want
enough so that there's some hope of
recovering data generating parameter
values but not so many that it takes
forever to fit the model. Yeah, that's
kind of the idea. Um, and then I'm just
going to count up all the diads and
that's what that line with the number of
combinations, right? All the number of
combinations of in number of
combinations of in things in twos. How
do you grammatically structure that
sentence? I'm not sure. Does that make
sense? We've got in things and we want
to draw them in pairs. How many ways are
there to do that? That's what that code
gives you. The T just rotates it so that
it's uh so that the diads are on rows
now because by default it's rotated in
the inconvenient way. Okay, it's
transpose. That's what T is for. Um and
then I just count up how many diads
there are, the number of rows. Uh and
this is what it looks like. It's
magical. Yeah. So you get all these
these combinations. Uh these are the
things again that computers are great
at, people are bad at, right?
That's that's what we used to call
artificial intelligence is that that we
make computers do things that they're
good at and we're bad at. Now we make
computers do things that we're good at
badly, right? And charge you money for
it. Sorry, that's a rant that I I should
leave out of the lecture, but um yeah, I
could have my computer write bad poetry.
That that would be exactly what I want
for matrix algebra. Sorry. Um so
[clears throat] uh now we're going to
simulate I'm going to call these
friendships just for the sake of the
metaphor but remember we don't know
they're friendships in the data. They're
just social ties and um some kind of
latent variable that expresses
regularities in exchange. I'm going to
come back to that theme multiple times
as we go through it. Uh so I'm just
going to uh express these in the
simulation as on and off but they could
could be continuous. Strength of social
ties I'm just say friends or not. Yeah,
it's some kind of special relationship.
Um, and I'm just setting a base rate
that a random 10% of the diads are
friends. You can explore this code and
change that around as you like. Um, uh,
now we're going to simulate um, ties uh,
for all of this. There's going to be a
bunch of relationships um, here in the
network. There's a base rate of ties.
Yeah. And I just generate this this
matrix Y which is something called an
adjacy matrix. We'll we'll plot that in
a moment. Um and then uh what does this
code do? Yes, I'm going to simulate
directed ties. So we go through all the
ids. Um and then um yeah, we simulate a
tie so that friends always have a tie
and then there's some base rate of other
ties which are not friends in this.
Yeah. And why am I doing this? You'll
see later. I'm going to since I know the
true thing, I'm going to plot friends
and the other ties differently and and
show you what goes on. Part of why I'm
doing this, and this is the experience
section, is I want the generative model
to have more structure in it than the
statistical model does. And I'm doing
this for pedagogical reasons to inspire
your imagination. That that is how it's
always in your own analyses is that the
the true the truth of nature has got
extra structure. But that doesn't mean
you can't learn things, right? You don't
have to completely model the the true
generative nature of your data. And
sometimes it's nice to misspecify your
statistical model like this and and show
that the parameters in your statistical
model are averaging over things other
entities that are in the simulation.
Does that make some sense? Um I
apologize for the complexity, but no,
actually I don't. Right. Okay. So
friends always share ties. That's the
point. Okay. Now we simulate some gifts.
Uh gifts are observable unlike ties.
Yeah, ties are in people's heads is the
idea. You can ask them about it. They
might tell you the truth. Yeah, that
sort of thing. Uh uh gifts can be
observed and gifts are associated with
ties but are not ex uh not
deterministically products of them. uh
there's some stochastic process because
remember in in this data set the gifts
are things like uh
meat, right? Some guy goes into the
forest with a dog and a shotgun and he
and he shoots at things or he chases
something into a burrow and his dog does
all the work. That's very common in this
community actually. They do a ton of
hunting with dogs. They love dogs to
death. They compete for them. They steal
them from one another. Dogs are
incredibly important technology for this
community. and uh uh the guy and his dog
get in a shotgun do some work. Sometimes
they're lucky, sometimes they're not. So
even if you would have shared if you had
gotten something, you weren't lucky
today. Right? So there's there's
stochasticity built in. And so in the
simulation, I'm going to now simulate
pluson distributed gifts uh using the
tie
um using the ties and that's what this
code does. We get gifts from A to B and
gifts from B to A in each diad. And
these are both posson variables where
the rate um is uh is uh this little
simple little the log rate is this
simple little linear model um uh with uh
some kind of base rate uh that's
different for the different strengths of
relationship, right? Where it's it's the
log rate is 0.5 when you don't share a
tie and it's two when you do.
Does that make sense? You could code
this up a different way and probably a
more transparent way but this is this is
the I hope this is clear enough. Uh and
then here all I'm doing is plotting the
the simulated network right using
um which is maybe pleasing but it shows
the chaos this is just observed um now
these are the true ties right this is
not the data so it's like if we could
know the true ties this is the kind of
network we could draw from it and you'll
see that you can see that um uh not
every diad is a tie with every other
diad
um let's talk about the statistical
side. Now, and when developing a
statistical model like this, uh again,
you can use the generative simulation
you just wrote, but you have to think
about it kind of in reverse. The last
step of simulating data is kind of the
first step of defining the the
statistical model, right? Because you
start with the outcome variable. You end
with the outcome variable in simulation
and you start with it when you define
the statistical model. So, that's where
what we're going to do on the next
slide. Before I do that, I should pause
and say questions. Is this madness? You
with me? You like it? It's It's like
Yeah. It's like watching your friend
play a video game, right? That's one of
the other directors once told me came
into my office for help with something
and I just started coding and I was
like, "You don't have to stand here. You
can go away and come back when I'm
done." He's like, "No, no, no. This is
like watching a friend play a video
game. It's great." So, I'm I'm perfectly
happy to uh live code in front of you
sometime if you find it entertaining,
but I can also understand it might be
terrifying. Okay. So um
uh for gifts from A to B, think about it
this way. We have this observation g a b
it's a count. It could be zero or some
positive integer. It's numbers of
peckeries [snorts] or something like
that. Yeah. Um this is this is Central
America. So everything's small. That's
the thing about about the Americas is
they have tiny things, right? Some of
the biggest mammals are rodents. Isn't
that right? And uh uh so this community
things tend to be fairly small. They're
not getting jaguars, right? That's not
not what happens here. [snorts] But so
we just have it as a count for now
because the you could analyze this data
set with kilograms too, but we're going
to do the count data. Um and then we're
going to model the log rate of GIFs from
A to B. There's going to be some base
rate alpha log base rate alpha, which is
common across all diads. Um, and then
we're going to add the tie. And this tie
is a parameter.
Yeah, it's just there. [laughter]
It's just in the additive model. This
additive model is two parameters. Alpha
plus the tie from A to B. But we can
estimate these parameters with the
structure of the data.
Right? There's no there's no predictor
variable
uh there at all. That's what these
latent variable models are often like.
This is a kind of factor analysis where
all the uh every there's just parameters
in the predictor. Um
it's symmetric. So we've also got gifts
from B to A. And I just want to show you
this is just the A's and B's switch
positions on both sides, right? But
we're going to analyze both
simultaneously.
Uh and then we need priors. And the
priors are where the action is um in the
social relations model because so far we
just have a plus on regression which is
not particularly exotic. Um but I mean I
like pluson regressions. The universe is
approximately plus on I like to say yeah
all other count data can be factored
into pluson. I love pson. It's like a
fundamental it's like the hydrogen of
count modeling. Right. uh so it's a very
nice credible kind of thing to do. Um
but beneath it we can structure uh the
co-variation in those observed quant
counts with lots of different ways by
using structured priors and that's what
we're going to do here to model the
social ties. So we're going to we're
going to have varying effects at the
diad level and this is where the tie
parameters come from. So we have a
multivariant normal, a two-dimensional
normal in which we draw the social ties
for each diad.
Um so the AB diad has two parameters
from A to B and B to A. Uh the means are
zero because alpha locates
the average, right? So we're just
modeling correlations in here with the
strength of these ties. And then there's
a a coariance matrix which you're used
to because you are all pros in in
varying effects now, right? remember the
all that Bangladesh nonsense from
previous weeks. But this is a special
matrix. It's simpler than the previous
ones because it's symmetric.
A full coariance matrix has two standard
deviations and one correlation
parameter.
I'll say that again. A full co 2x2
coariance matrix has two standard
deviations. That's the variance of each
variable and a correlation parameter to
rel relate them to one another. But this
one only has one standard deviation and
that's the standard deviation um of of
ties
within diads. Uh it we only have one
because it's totally symmetric. It's
absolutely arbitrary who's a and who's
b.
Yeah. So it needs to be exchangeable.
The A's and B's need to be perfectly
exchangeable and the prior must be
invariant to relabeling. And that's why
it's done this way. Does that make some
intuitive sense? Yeah. That said, you
could do a full rank coariance matrix
here and get the same results because
Stan's amazing, but there's no reason to
have an extra parameter if you don't
need it. Yeah, you'll you'll get two
sigma estimates if you do that and
they'll be the same. But uh uh but it's
nicer just to have one and feel good
about yourself, right? Um you did the
right thing and the model got simpler.
How often does that happen, right? So
that's that's how we do this. And um
this is the feature of the social
relations model by the way which makes
it difficult to do in most off-the-shelf
software. Uh because if you just start
specifying random effects at the diad
level, you're going to get a full rank
coariance matrix if you use BRMS or LME4
or something like that. Again, that's
not doom. Uh but this kind of constraint
is nice for estimation because it's
easier to identify the sigma if you pull
information from both sides of the diad.
Okay, does that sermon make sense? I I
know when I first encountered social
relations model, I was confused why this
was like this, but I hope it makes some
sense. Okay. Um
more uh we've we need a um prior for the
correlation row. I'm going to use LKJ
again,
the LKJ distribution. And um since this
is two dimensional, it means there's one
correlation parameter. So it's not that
exciting, but remember LKJ is a a family
of priors for correlation matrices if if
you want to scale up this model. Um, and
for example, we're not going to do this,
but there's no reason you couldn't do
triadic interactions with a model with
this structure, right? Not all
interactions are diatic,
right? Like right now we're having an
interaction and it's not diatic. Or
maybe it's a bunch of diads. It's hard
to tell actually, but uh but they're
definitely triadic interactions, right?
Or higher order work groups, all kinds
of things that go on. And you can just
scale this up uh in the same way. Um and
then we've got uh uh exponential prior
on sigma and our base rate. I'm just
going to make normal 01
uh there.
Um, this codes up in Ulam fairly
directly uh, aside from the fact that
I'm going to use the non-entered
parameterization here. So, there's a
bunch of kleski nonsense uh, in the Ulam
code that didn't doesn't appear in the
mathematical model. But you're you're
familiar with this. Remember when I did
this? What was it last week? The week
before? I forget when. Um, and this
makes this uh, run a lot better. This is
a kind of classic situation in which the
non-entered parameterization works
better. Why? because you've got a lot of
diads and there's a lot of imbalance in
how much data there is per diad. Some of
them are very sparse. And in that
situation,
typically a non-entered parameterization
samples better. And the opposite would
be if you had a small number of diads
and tons of data for each and then
typically the centered parameterization
samples better. Uh but to be honest,
it's really hard to guess sometimes. And
so you might start with one guess and
then have to refactor the model. Um, but
I'm I'm starting here because I know in
this case this one runs better. Uh, uh,
what's going on? Let me let me annotate
this a little bit. Here's I should have
I should have done this already. Here's
uh the multivariant normal prior, right?
And we see it's there's a a matrix of
zcores,
the kleski factor and sigma. And those
all get composed into the capital T
matrix using that composed non-entered
function which is just something I wrote
to make the code easier. Right? But the
the matrix algebra is in the book if you
want to ever do this by hand. Yeah,
there's it's just a simple matrix
multiplication thing. Is this good? Does
it make sense? Uh part of the trick here
is you see I'm rep vectoring sigma t to
make it of length two. I take take that
parameter sigma t and I make a vector of
length two that in which it's been
pasted twice. That's what vector does in
the code. Yeah, I know this is a bit
arcane and weird, but this is the
experience section and I hope you enjoy
this. Yeah. Um again, uh you could just
use use two sigas um and get away with
this. Uh maybe that's an exercise for
the student. Um this sample's fine. Um
there's a lot of parameters, right?
There's 300 diads. So there's a lot of
parameters here. And um I mean we can do
bigger than this. There's a model
running in my office right now that's a
social network model for monkeys that I
think has 2,000 diads or something in
it. Um so it this model will scale like
that. It just takes longer, you know,
but that's good. You can go make some
coffee, you know, gossip in the kitchen.
Like that's what happens in my
department, right, guys? Uh, and yeah,
then they're nodding at for people at
home. [laughter] Um, but that's good for
your mental health. You should do that,
right? You should go hang out in the
kitchen and talk nonsense. It's a very
important part of work life. Okay. Uh,
so these are these trace rank plots. I
just want to show you it's nice to check
these, inspect the R hats and the
effective sample sizes. Um, we're
analyzing synthetic data, remember? So,
we know some ground truth we're not
going to know in the real data. meaning
I can separate out um
uh truth from fiction in in some sense.
So we know which diads have ties because
we simulated that and now we have
estimates for the these this giant
matrix of parameters which are the ties
and they're continuous. So on the left
what I've done is I've plotted the
posterior mean well the density of the
posterior means for those tie parameters
um
split by the truth the ground truth. So
in red is the is the kernel density
estimate um for all of the diads where
there's really no tie and the blue is
when there really is and I showed that
the model can separate them right for
any particular diad there there might be
substantial uncertainty and there is
mclassification
right because you there may not be data
for every diad that can really diagnose
it um this plot doesn't show that
calibration but what you could show uh
is that the model is also uncertain in
those cases about the tie strength for
those diads. It's not claiming one or
the other. It's like I don't know. I'm
just plotting posterior means here
though. And I just want to show you in
the aggregate it separates the two
subopuls. Yeah. But then at the diad
level when there's very little data for
the diad, it's like I have no idea if
there's a tie. It's just using the base
rate of ties.
Does this make sense? Uh so this is a a
first kind of check that the machine
works. And then on the right we're
looking at the correlation that one
parameter in in the diad varying effects
that is the correlation. And um I've uh
since friends this is why the friend
thing is in here. Friends always share
ties. The other ties I simulated are not
always shared. I'll say that again.
Friends in the simulation always share
ties.
But there are other ties which are just
directed and unshared in this data set
because that's how life is, right?
There's somebody who really likes you
and they keep giving you presents. Does
anybody have someone like this in their
life? No, you should. Everybody should,
but no. Or maybe you're the other side
of that, right? There's someone you
really like and you keep giving them
things. That's that's fine. Go for it.
And uh but then there's symmetrical
ones. And so that's why I did the
friendship simulation. And that
generates this correlation as an
epiphenomenon. I haven't rigged this
correlation directly. I've put it in the
synthetic data by the rate of
friendships. Does that make sense? So I
want I may be crazy but in this case it
there is a method to it. Yes. Okay. And
then we get a positive correlation a
very strong positive correlation from
this that's driven by those friendships.
Yeah. Um and another way to see this if
we plot households uh plot diads
household A on the horizontal and B on
the vertical. Remember those labels are
are exchangeable and I separate them out
in colors. Um these this is the strength
of the tie in each direction. Uh uh A's
to A to B on the horizontal and B to A
on the vertical. And the friends here
are in purple or whatever that color is.
Fuchsia something uh violet I don't
know. And um and you'll see that they
have higher values. Yeah. And and and
more symmetry. it's along the horizontal
more.
Um, those are just posterior means,
right? There's a lot of uncertainty.
Now, we're going to analyze the real
data. Uh, since we've done all that
software engineering, this just means we
swap out the data set. Yeah, this feels
really good when you do a project like
this. Let me tell you, [laughter] it's
really great. You spend you spend a week
fighting with the synthetic data. Um, I
know one of you is doing this all the
time right now. I'm pointing at you
person. I won't name you on the thing,
but but and making progress, but you
fight with the simulated data for for a
week and then you put the real data in
and it's just like, oh, it samples and
it's just like it's it's like a Zen
experience. So, Tori, right, you've
achieved the enlightenment and then you
inspect the trace plots and it doesn't
sample efficiently, but you have to
refactor it, but it's better than if you
had just dumped the real data in first.
Yeah. Because at least it runs. Yeah.
And so that's what we do here and it
runs and we've got you check the precy
output for sampling just to show that it
it converges and we're sampling from the
posterior correctly. And I want to
highlight just on this slide because
we're not this we know this is not our
destination model. This is just the
first feature set for the model. I just
want to show you that it's estimating a
positive correlation within diads on the
real data.
Yeah, that's the correlation in the
lower right. And I've just the precy
output there just shows you what a
correlation matrix inside the precy
output looks like. Yeah,
there's just one parameter but it shows
up twice
just to show you
uh how it how it's how a matrix is
represented in stand. Does this make
sense? Can I move on? Yeah, I've got
more features. Now we're going to put
the households in and try to deal with
these backdoor paths. Now we're going to
take that model we just built the
world's simplest social network model.
uh latent uh friendship model you might
call it. And now I'm going to put in um
generalized giving and receiving effects
um for the households to deal with these
backdoor paths. Uh so you can think
about this. Remember this is the
software engineering thing. I want to be
a little bit more explicit about it.
We're remember my drawing the owl
metaphor, right? Uh so we've um we want
we want to estimate reciprocity. We've
got a generative model, the statistical
model, and analyze the sample, but we're
actually iterating. It's this isn't one
pass through uh is the idea is we
iterate through this design loop and we
update the generative model, we update
statistical model, we analyze it, and we
iterate through. And that's just a
healthy way to develop these things. So
you can manage the complexity. Um
and um yeah, you can do a lot more
science with less if you manage manage
the complexity. this way. All right. So,
here's the new uh I'm updating the
simulation. Now, we're going to put in
generalized effects.
So, this is
um
uh this is just what we had before. Yes.
And I don't think there's anything new
here actually. Um and now we're going to
simulate I'm going to simulate um
something else which generates giving
and that's wealth. So, I'm going to
assign a variable capital W to each
household, which is just a standardized
measure of the relative wealth of the
household in the community. That's the
top line here. [snorts] And I'm going to
make up some causal effects of that. Um,
BWG is the effect of wealth on giving
irrespective of is that a word?
Irrespective. Sounds like a word. Yeah,
I've been in Germany too long. Like, I
forget. But uh uh irrespective of social
ties right there's just general giving.
So this by making this positive.5
there's a small tendency for wealthy
households to give to everybody.
Now you can't interpret the
anthropologists in the audience know you
can't necessarily interpret the
motivation from that because it could be
demand sharing. It could be that rich
households have stuff and people show up
at the door and beg. That happens a lot
in human societies, right? It isn't
necessarily that the rich household gets
stuff and then goes around throwing it
around. But that also happens in human
societies, right? The conspicuous
giving. Um and Jeremy know Jeremy Coer
knows the answer to that in this case,
but we can't tell in in this data,
right? You learn that by living with
people. That's why we do ethnography.
Yes. Um and then in the other direction,
uh the tendency uh the effect of wealth
on receiving and that's negative. Um uh
so the rich get less,
right? That's what the negative means.
The higher your W value, the less you
receive.
The lower your W value, the more you
receive. So poor households receive
more.
You understand that? Yeah. You have to
kind of like multiply by negative one in
your head, right? Because wealth can be
negative because it's standardized.
Yeah. I wealth can be negative in the
real world too without standardization.
But that's not the point of how the data
set works. Um, are we good? Yeah, you
like our code. I can tell everybody's
really happy with this. Uh, then we
simulate gifts again. But now the wealth
variables appear. Let me show you where
they are, right? So those wealth varied
and the coefficients we've chosen appear
down here in the bottom. So we have the
ties Y which affect the rate of giving.
Remember this is that matrix Y which is
an adjacy matrix. It's filled with ones
and zeros which are the it's the social
network you might call that of
friendships and um
uh should not of friendships but of of
relationships. Some of them are
friendships and then we add to that
additive increments additive on the log
scale for uh giving and receiving as a
function of wealth.
Good. And that'll generate additional
effects. Um here's what we do to the
model. Now I'm going to do some surgery.
This is the model we had before and I'm
going to do surgery on it now. Is that
okay? There'll be no blood.
I promise. Uh
okay.
Um what we need to do is take again
inspired by the generative model. We're
going to edit log lambda.
Yeah. And we're going to add in um
additional effects.
Uh so let's pull it out. And I'm going
to add two more parameters. I'm not
going to use the wealth data right now.
I'm going to do that eventually. I'm
going to use measured wealth in this
community as a predictor. But I want to
start with a model that doesn't have
those measurements on the right hand
side, but puts in two new latent factors
because we like latent factors, don't
we? Yeah. Now, why would we do this? Uh
because this is the first order thing.
You can absorb those unmeasured
household level effects into these
latent factors and controlful household
effects on generalized giving and
receiving even if you don't know what's
driving it, but you can still observe
that some households give more and some
give less without knowing what explains
it. And that's that's this model and
that's what we're going to do first. And
then I'm going to add wealth in and try
to explain those patterns with the
wealth variable. Okay, that's where
we're going. So uh G sub A is A's
generalized um giving. And yes, I know
I've used G twice in the same model and
and that's very bad. Uh but but
hopefully it's it's better than calling
giving something other than G. Yeah. And
um R is receiving. So G sub A is A's
generalized giving. It appears in every
time uh every time A is in the giving
position in in a row, G sub A appears.
And every time B is in the receiving
position in a diad, um R subB appears
and they're just increments and we're
going to estimate those. They're zero
centered. We're going to make priors in
a moment. Yeah. Let's put this back in
the model and we copy it for GBA. It's
the same thing. And now we need more
varying effects. Yes, we do. Uh because
we're going to cluster on households. We
already clustered on on diads and that's
what the diad varying effects are. But
now we have household effects and the GA
and RA for the same household A will be
drawn from a common prior so that we can
model the correlation in giving and
receiving at the household level.
Yes. Does that make sense?
>> Repeat that.
>> Yes. We're going to we're going to for
any household A it's giving generalized
giving and receiving parameters are
going to be drawn from a common prior
with a correlation so that we can model
the correlation between generalized
giving and receiving at the household
level. It might be and it's going to
turn out that there's a negative
relationship between these two things.
Yeah. Which is symptomatic of the wealth
effect. Does that make sense? Households
which tend to give in general tend to
receive less. It doesn't have to be
true. But having this prior allows us to
estimate that and to gain strength by
partially pooling across them because
there may be some households where we
don't observe many cases of them
receiving but but because the sample
size is low and then a prior like this
will borrow strength from given then the
general correlation structure of giving
receiving in the whole community. Yeah,
it's that varying effect strategy. Does
this make sense? I appreciate that
there's there's a ton of moving parts in
this model which is why this lecture is
so incremental and and just terrifying
like but actually the faces in the crowd
are happy.
Yes. Sort of. Yes. Okay. At least for
Europeans that those are happy European
cases. Like as happy as anybody gets.
[laughter] But no, this is a central
European joke for the people at home.
You have to understand that smiling is
optional in Central and Eastern Europe.
It's actually terrifying,
right? It's a little different than say
the United States where people smile
like maniacs constantly. Um, you have to
readjust your expectations. Okay, that's
enough anthropology about the smi-
smiling in Europe. But, uh, um, so
what's going on here? I should have put
these labels up before. This is just an
ordinary two-dimensional multivariate
partial pooling prior. There's nothing
special here. It's a full rank coariance
matrix because the G's and A are not G's
and Rs are not exchangeable. They're
[clears throat] different types of
things.
That's different than the diad matrix
because the t's are exchangeable.
They're the same kind of parameter. Does
that make sense? So, we have two
standard deviations. Now, back to the
normal case. You can use standard syntax
and build it up. Um, let's put it all
uh Oh, yeah. So, we're going to factor
that coariance matrix as usual into a
correlation matrix and a vector of
standard deviations. and we smuggle it
into the model and we put then priors
for the correlation matrix um again LKJ
and the vector of two standard
deviations capital S.
Um let's review this model. We have 25
households, 300 diads, um uh 600 counts,
and 2871
transfers,
right? Uh so that's that's the data up
at the top level of what's being
modeled. All those GABs. Yeah. And there
are 600 of them. Uh uh and if you sum up
the counts in all of them, you get 2,871
transfers. Um there are 602 social
network parameters inside the blue code.
Good times. Yeah. And 53 household
parameters in addition. So a lot of
parameters. there are more parameters
than there are measured outcomes.
Um that's fine. Yeah, that's there's a
question.
>> Yeah, that because that's something that
I've been thinking for some time. So
with when you have all these many
parameters, I understand how um having
all these different effects and
everything makes the model more
effective. But how does sample size deal
with is it better or worse? Because you
the model is more effective, but you
have a lot of parameters. sample size.
[laughter]
>> Yeah. So the the question in case it's
not being picked up on the mic is how
does sample size affect accuracy of
estimation in a model like this? And uh
the answer is it's very complicated. I
don't have a more correct answer than
that but let me say a little bit more.
Um I don't want to spend a lot of time
on this but we're going to talk about
this in subsequent weeks a lot too
especially like when we do Gaussian
processes because it's a similar thing.
um
the relationship between sample size and
parameter count depends critically on
the structure of the parameters to one
another. So the the general idea that as
you add more parameters you get
overfitting is only true in really
simple onelevel models without priors
without regularizing priors. um you know
basic polomial regression in a
frequentist context for example. Uh but
when you leave that behind and start
embedding parameters in as functions of
other parameters like in a hierarchical
model like this you can actually get
less overfitting by adding parameters
and that's what a model like this does.
It's the same thing well same general
phenomenon but it works a different way
in um in machine big machine learning
models neural networks LLMs and they
have billions of parameters but they're
related to one another in complicated
hierarchical ways that actually reduces
overfitting.
Yeah. Uh and I say I qualified that
those don't work exactly the same
because it's also how those models are
trained. They use something called
stochastic gradient descent which also
regularizes. Uh so it's like double
regularization in in those types of
models and we're not doing stochastic
gradient descent here but we are doing
integration that's what baye does and
that also regularizes so you get yeah so
there's not a simple uh relationship to
it um my attitude
is that the structure of the um of the
statistical model comes from the
generative model and is independent of
the sample size.
uh and so you
uh prematurely simplifying the stat
model because of sample size concerns I
don't think should be done. I think you
should try it. Um and very often you
might be surprised how well it works. Uh
but often yes you can you can estimate
more parameters than you have data
points. I know it seems impossible but
it absolutely is true. Some of those
parameters will not be estimated very
accurately but that's okay because we
may not need to know them. They're there
I mean some of these parameters like the
standard deviations and the correlations
may not be of direct interest to you.
Here we do care about the correlations.
They're just there to do regularization.
Yeah. Um okay that's a great question.
So I would love to talk about it more
and when we come to Gaussian processes I
am going to talk about it a lot more
because there's a lot of cool
regularization that goes on in those.
Okay. Model code. Here you go.
Yeah this is a good one. Right. But
every chunk you take it in chunk. You
folks are pros. Uh you know what's going
on here. Let me move from top to bottom
and just say a little bit about the
code. Yeah. Is that useful? You want me
to do that? I'm going to do it anyway. I
don't care what you say. Okay. So the
top one just the outcome space. This is
like the other model, but notice we've
got u the household a giving. So there's
this GR matrix now and um the first
column of it is giving. Why? because I
assigned it to be that. Uh so the we GR
bracket HA comma 1 means look in the GR
varying effect matrix. Give me the row
for household A and give me the first
column and that's going to be
generalized giving for household A. Why
is it generalizing for household A?
Because that's on GAB. Household A is
the is in the giving role on that line.
Yeah. The first log lambda line. You see
it? uh it's flipped in the second one.
Right now it's household B that's in the
giving role on the second one because
that's GBA. And then you have the
receiving which is column two which is
the second part. Does this matrix
notation make some sense? Yeah. Um I
like to do this. There's just like
bracket madness in my models everywhere.
But it's notationally can get out of
hand really fast. So I'm not going to
endorse it as a standard strategy. You
could do some transformations into other
vectors in code below and make the
notation cleaner. I'm going to show you
an example of that if I can manage to
push forward to the final model here.
Um, let me move through. This is our uh
our diad effects. There's nothing new
here. It's exactly the same code. Um
then we've got another block with more
composed non-entered nonsense just for
the two-dimensional varying effect
matrix for generalized giving and
receiving. Um and then the thing at the
very bottom is to convert uh kleski
matrices into correlation matrices just
for convenience because we want to
interpret the correlation right that's
all it does at the bottom. Okay this is
synthetic data just to validate this is
simulated so we know what to expect. Um,
we've got generalized giving and general
and and generalized receiving. I've made
rigged this to be negatively associated
because I generated wealth and I said
that poorer households receive more and
wealthier households give more and so I
expect some negative relationship and I
find a very strong one here in the
simulated data. The way I plotted this,
there are posterior means and red points
and those ellipses are I think 50% um
credible ellipses. If you can think
about that, if you want to know how to
do this, the remember the script to draw
all these things is on the website in
the scripts folder. Okay, you just draw
an ellipse. Like literally the code is
there. There's a package called ellipse.
And um it's it's not that complicated.
Um uh okay. And then there's I show you
the correlation for giving and receiving
there in blue. That's the correlation
coefficient. Very negative piled up
against minus one. Again, this is an
epipenomenon of the mechanism I assumed
in the synthetic data but wasn't in the
statistical model. Yeah. Is that fun?
You like it? Yeah. There are two people
over there who like it. I'm I'm working
for you, too. All right. Everybody else
is like, "What is Richard up to now?"
That's okay. These lectures are a
buffet. You take what you like.
And there's a lot more we can look at in
the synthetic data. Um the resposity
correlation is still strong. Uh it's
even stronger now. it's increased.
That's the red correlation in the bottom
right. Um the it's still separating uh
friends from non-friend or or rather
ties from no ties and and friends from
non-friend.
Um so the model seems to work. We could
inc you could play with this more. You
could increase the sample size. You
could look at precision. You could do
study design with something like this,
right? How many diets do I need? How how
does it hurt me when there's imbalance?
And all those kinds of things. All
right. Now, real data, same plots, uh,
except for the truth one with that we
can't do, right? I'm just going to show
you the network. We've got households,
um, plot the same way. There's a
negative association here, too. It's
just not as as extreme because
generalized receiving never gets that
high uh, in this sample. But generalized
giving gets quite high. There are some
households there in the bottom right at
that left graph which have a lot of
generalized giving.
Um, and then there are some there's
there's a negative relationship here,
right? It's just not as extreme. That
that dash diagonal is the line of
equality, right? Where giving matches
receiving.
Okay. Um, and then you'll see yes,
there's a negative correlation between
giving and receiving in blue. And
there's a very very strong um
correlation in reciprocity at the diad
level. Now because remember this is
measured after subtracting generalized
giving and receiving now because we're
conditioning on that in the same model.
So this is saying after we adjust for
generalized giving and receiving and
we're only looking at balance in diads
after having removed that then there's
tremendous balance. So the the
proportion of exchange that is not
explained by general features but rather
by the the ties is incredibly symmetric.
Yeah.
Another way to say that after you've
accounted for generalized giving and
receiving at the household level, what's
residual is incredibly symmetric at the
across households within diads. There's
tons of balance in what's left. Cool.
Yes, I think it's very cool. I think
this is very very cool. All right, I've
got I still have eight minutes. I can do
it. Okay, [laughter] so um we have a
posterior uh mean network. Remember the
our posterior distribution now is full
of networks. If we take all those tie
parameters and sample from them, we can
draw networks from it. But you need to
do that for different draws, right? And
there's this giant matrix of ties. It's
an adjacency matrix we've estimated.
Yeah, a big adjacency matrix of of ties
of continuous strength. So I've done
some thresholding to draw these images
too, right? I have to say like what
counts as a tie. Uh you can also do
shading, but that never kind of works
very well. But again, the code to draw
these things is is on the website. you
want to play with iiggraph's code. You
can draw these networks in different
ways. Um
and uh like you can make the arrows have
different thickness for the strength of
the ties and all kinds of things. It's
just it gets chaotic very quickly. I
want to show you something else instead
which is the uncertainty uh by doing
this animation. So these are just a
bunch of draws from the posterior and I
redraw the network using the same code
and you can see the variation. Some
clicks, those really tight clicks are
very stable.
By the way, if you do this, you need to
fix the node locations.
So, there's code in my script to do
that. Otherwise, the network just jumps
around crazily and you can't tell what's
stable. But I fixed the node locations.
Uh, and then I'm just redrawing uh
drawing from the posterior and redrawing
the arrows. You see some those little
clicks where you have triangles, right?
The social network afficionados in my
department love triangles, right? So,
you've got the little triangles. Those
are stable clicks. And then there are
other relationships between those clicks
which are of lower intensity. And so
when you draw from the posterior,
they're not present every time. Does
this help a little bit? Every time you
see a social network that has been
estimated in anybody's work in a paper
talk, I want you to remember this
animation,
right? There's there's often a lot of
posterior uncertainty about some parts
of the network and very little about
others. And representing that is a
struggle because again, you can't put
this animation in a paper. But one day
we will actually have a modern
scientific publishing industry in which
you can have live graphs in your papers.
Yeah. Alfredo.
>> Can you parameterize that uncertainty as
in are there critical intervals or
something?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's just hard to
represent this is a highly this is a
very multi-dimensional space and so um
but you could plot the ties and they're
and uh the plot the ties and put
credible intervals on them like in a big
forest plot. I've done that before. And
you can rank them by their uncertainty
and do lots of stuff. It it comes down
to what questions you have and how you
want to represent it. Okay, I got five
minutes. I want to try to do the last
model. Um, very quickly, I want to
remind you social networks don't exist.
Too dank memes. Social networks don't.
Does anybody remember Insane Clown Posi?
Yes. Okay, thank you. I was like, I'm
getting old and my memes are even older.
So, but um yeah, but yeah,
social networks, how do they work? It's
a miracle, [snorts]
right? And uh this is not to say social
networks are bad. Social networks don't
exist. All I mean is they're a social
construction. And in this case, they're
a construction of the analyst. And we
construct them in a particular way to do
inferial work for ourselves. There's no
true network when it comes to exchange.
There's a true network for plumbing and
the electrical grid, right? But there's
not here. It depends upon what you're
trying to measure. Does that make sense?
Um that's not a bad thing. It's just you
want to keep that in mind. And in
particular, what that means is we can
treat these varying effects, that is the
ties and the generalized giving and
receiving as just placeholders for
functions of things we might measure.
And we're going to try to explain away
the variance in these varying effects by
by adding to the model wealth and
another kind of observation think the
association matrix for these households,
which is observations of how often
people from the households are observed
together in social settings. And we have
that because Jeremy Coer lived in this
place, right? And they did scan
sampling. So there's a lot of data on
this just how who hangs out with who.
Yeah. Who drinks together, stuff like
that. Um and that's what we're going to
do next. So we're going to take the
previous model and again I'm going to do
a little surgery. I'm going to pull out
the lambda the log lambda equation and
I'm going to edit this. Um, I'm going to
replace capital TAB with fancy capital
TAB.
You see it? It got fancy. Yeah. Back up.
See, it's not fancy.
Now it's fancy. Yeah, it's called fancy.
I think there's a name for that type
face, but fractur or something like
that. Um, and uh uh I do this just to
signal that this is going to be its own
linear model. This is just for
notational convenience. I'm I'm
replacing fancy t with this its own
additive model to model the tie from a
to b as a function of that previous
parameter t a b and um a slope now the
effect of association between a and b
and this measured association which is
how often a was was uh found with b.
Does that make sense? This is attempt to
I'm making a regression to explain the
ties inside the model. Yeah, I'm going
to do the same thing for G. Now we have
fancy G
and it is our previous capital G
parameter um a slope for the effect of
wealth on giving
times uh uh A's wealth,
right? I'm trying to explain giving with
wealth
and then um same for receiving the same
idea. Does this make some sense? You can
do this with varying effects in any
varying effect model, right? It's like
you start the varying effects partition
the variance, give you an idea where the
action is and what the correlation
structure is and then you might want to
go deeper and say, "Yeah, but that's
just a latent parameter. I have measured
stuff that might be that might be
associated with that. Let me put it in
and this is this works." It's just
notationally a strategy like this where
you make sublinear models helps you
manage the chaos. Otherwise, you get a
one really long log lambda line and it
gets chaotic and hard to keep track of.
But this is a little easier. So, we can
put all this in. Isn't that beautiful?
Just absolutely beautiful.
If you like linear models, well, I put
linear models in your linear models,
right? That's And I should have made
that a meme. That's that's that's
exhibit. Yeah. And uh Okay. And here's
the um here's the ulam code. Uh oh, no.
This is this is uh Yeah. Yeah. This is
the Ulam code. Um so now literally in
Ulam you can just have as many linear
models as you like and embed them in one
another. Um there's no limit. Yeah.
It'll just parse it, right? Um okay, let
me move to the end of this. I can
actually finish this today. So now I'm
going to do model comparison. I'm going
to compare the model with the
association index to the one without it.
That was the previous model. and just
look at the standard deviation estimated
across ties, right? That's like the you
can think of that as the proportion of
variance explained by ties, how much
they vary. Um, and that's the x-axis on
this plot. And then we have uh the red
density is what it was before. The
absolute value isn't isn't what matters.
It's just that's where it was before.
Um, we add the association index. The
standard deviation shrinks, which is a
measure of how much the association
index has explained.
Does that make some sense? So in a
nonlinear model, there's no kind of
variance deco additive variance
decomposition you can do like in a
linear model because the variance
doesn't add in a nonlinear model. It
multiplies in complicated ways. So
you're going to have to do model
comparisons like this if you want to
talk about variance explained. Does that
make sense? Uh it's just just the truth
of of of nonlinear outcome variables. If
it has a zero floor, the variance can't
add, right? I used to I used to tell
this this thing like if you're modeling
mortality of salamanders, if any one
thing kills the salamander, nothing else
can. It's already dead. Yeah. So the
variance of nonlinear effects like
mortality just don't add, right? There's
like an absorbing boundary. Death is an
absorbing boundary. You cross the river
of sticks. You can't go back. It doesn't
matter. He's he's dead already. Stop
kicking him. Isn't that a Simpsons
thing? Yeah. But um uh does this make
sense? Yes. Okay. Last thing I want to
talk about um we compare the receiving
and giving in this model as an effect of
wealth. The horizontal axis here uh is
the effect of wealth. Those beta
coefficients um uh W on G and W R is
giving blue is receiving and you can see
indeed in the real data giving is
positively associated uh with wealth.
wealthier households give more and it's
uh and receiving is negatively
associated with wealth which means
richer households receive less and poor
households receive more.
How cool is that? Yeah. Um okay, I'm I'm
one minute over. I apologize. Let me let
me move through the end here. I say some
stuff about triangles. Um I'm not going
to do that here. There's a lot we've
left out. Uh networks have higher
structure. You can there's a big ex way
to there's lots of ways to expand these
models to include things like triads and
the other big theme is uh clusters of
households we call blocks that is often
ties form in communities and you get you
see triangles and higher structure
because people form ties because of
where they're located. So block could be
locations one side of the river or the
other. They could be departments like in
our institute where people share ties in
the department because they have the
same kitchen. Yeah. Things like that.
But we can add those. That's called
block models. Um and last thing I want
to say is models like this uh really
aggressively regularize depending upon
the priors you choose um the raw data.
So the left here are just the gifts, the
observed gifts. And sometimes you'll see
see people take the outcome like that
and just plot it and say that's the
network. I think this is a bad idea
because it ignores the sample size
differences, right? And the the right is
an infer inferred network. Well, it's
one draw. It's the posterior mean
network and that is aggressively
regularized. Right? The model is more
skeptical of some ties even though on
the left they they're exchanges.
Basically every household exchanges with
every other household in this data set.
Some
Yeah.
Okay. Um, this is what we've done today.
I feel good about it. It was a lot. Um,
in future uh weeks, we're going to
expand this strategy. You can call this
varying effects as a technology. There's
lots of kinds of regularities and
clustering in data sets and ways we can
use that to make inferences about latent
causes. Um, there are lots of analogous
problems that have structures like
social networks. Floyny. I'm gonna I'm
gonna teach you in a in a later week is
a special application of this
phoggenetic regression is like a it's
like it's like a social network where
all the internal nodes have died.
[laughter]
Yeah, that's really Macob. I'm sorry,
but you know, extinctions forever. I
don't know what to say about that, but
um but there's also spatial
autocorrelation. Locations generate a
network. Yeah, think about a chessboard,
right? The adjacent cells form a
network. Uh, so we can use that to model
space, heritability, knowledge,
personality, all kinds of things. And
that's what we're going to do in the
next two, three weeks is I'm going to
show you special applications of this
general strategy. Um, thank you for your
attention. I apologize for going four
minutes over. Enjoy your weekend. I'll
see you next week.